1 Philadelphia City Hall

Planned as the world’s tallest building when construction commenced in 1871, the tower was usurped by the Washington Monument and Eiffel Tower before its completion. Alexander Milne Calder’s 37-foot bronze William Penn is the tallest statue on any building anywhere, double the size of Statue of Freedom on the U.S. Capitol.

That dome’s designer, Thomas Walker, came out of retirement to help architect John McArthur Jr. with this monumental edifice. Neither man lived to see their work completed. Calder, who crafted 250 sculptures for city hall and was there in 1894 to see his 27-ton Penn hoisted to its apex, despaired that the founder was installed looking north, which leaves his face perpetually in shadow.

The tower is built of load-bearing brick walls sheathed in marble and rests on 22-foot-thick granite walls at its base. Above the four clocks, marble gives way to white painted steel, a replacement of the original cast iron.

Besides the internal clockwork and two extravagant mayoral and council rooms, the tower is basically empty but for a staircase and small, slow elevator to take passengers to the viewing deck. An unwritten agreement that kept Penn’s hat the tallest point in the city was finally broken in 1987.

--

2 1616 Walnut Street

One of several skyscrapers built by real estate developer Joseph Greenberg, this has a garage occupying most of the first five floors. Ads when it opened promised “Park your car under your desk!” Office tenants included investment brokers, insurance firms, the Philadelphia Grand Opera and the local office for Cunard White Star ocean liners.

The powerfully wealthy but publicity-shy Pew family took the penthouse as their pied-a-terre, since it was conveniently located next door to the headquarters of their family business, Sun Oil Company, also known as Sunoco.

Philadelphia architects Tilden, Register & Pepper won an award for their design at the 12th International Buildings Congress in Budapest, Hungary. Their spectacular Art Deco lobby features a ceiling of contoured geometric patterns, futuristic chandeliers, mottled tan marble walls, a patterned terrazzo floor, and elegant aluminum trim and elevator doors.

The building served as the home of Temple University Center City from the 1970s until 2001. Now it contains luxury apartments, and residents have access to the Pews’ former rooftop sundeck.

--

3 Architects Building

As the name implies, this tower provided offices for architects. It also was designed by them, as 20 firms participated in a committee headed by John Hall Rankin, respected dean of the field and former president of the local chapter of the American Institute of Architects.

Shortly after the building opened, the AIA held a public exhibition showcasing the work of several members who now occupied offices upstairs. Paul Cret, for instance, displayed photos of his Rodin Museum on the Benjamin Franklin Parkway, recently dedicated and containing one of the most extensive collections of the Paris sculptor’s work. The AIA relocated in 2008, but its library on the top floor has been preserved as it once appeared.

The building, now the Hotel Palomar, has a sleek Art Deco exterior with handsome bronze panels and patterned brickwork testifying that the architects knew what they were doing. Best of all is the historic second floor elevator lobby, which combines vibrant tilework and carved wood with a dramatically coffered plaster ceiling and Welsh quarry tile floor.

--

4 Lincoln-Liberty Building

While Wanamaker’s is famed for its enormous pipe organ, this granite highrise built to hold a much-expanded men’s department for the store is known for the hourly tolls of its gigantic bell. The 17-ton Founder’s Bell, commissioned in memory of John Wanamaker, first rang on New Year’s Day 1927 from a special tower constructed on the roof of the great department store.

It was soon relocated to the belfry of the new Lincoln-Liberty Building, the first seven floors of which purveyed a tasteful array of tailored suits, fashionable overcoats, hunting costumes and sporting goods for the discerning gentleman, with high-end leasable office space and a penthouse above. A pair of much-admired 1890s skyscrapers had to be torn down to make way for the new construction, so its original appellation name-checked them both in order to assuage any hard feelings.

After Philadelphia National Bank bought the tower, four sets of its illuminated initials “PNB” perched atop the belfry for nearly 60 years. They were finally removed by cargo helicopter in 2014 from the building now known as One South Broad, and one huge “B” was rehung in the lobby.

--

5 The Drake

The contours of this slab skyscraper are Art Deco, but slathered on top is an icing of terracotta and tiled rooftops and gazebos seemingly transplanted from Seville or Southern California. Developers named the luxury residential highrise for a celebrated English privateer who looted goodly sums of Spanish booty while claiming the Pacific coast for Queen Elizabeth I.

Architects Ritter & Shay also designed Market Street National Bank, a cousin to the Drake that features ornamentation more strictly Deco though no less exuberant. With 300 apartments and a cluster of penthouses, the Drake touted true high society city living.

In the 1970s, owners Stanton and Robert Miller ran high stakes bingo games in the ballroom five nights a week — allegedly for charity, in reality for their pockets. Unlike Sir Francis Drake, the Millers wound up sentenced to prison for their ill-gotten gains, and the property suffered through bankruptcy and other ignominies until its eventual renovation.

The two-story penthouse on top affords breathtaking views from its twin patios, but not from the red-roofed dome, which just hides a water tank.

--

6 Elverson Building

Said to be the world’s largest newspaper plant at the time of its construction, the Elverson Building was named for the Philadelphia Inquirer’s fourth owner, James Elverson — according to its fifth owner, his son James Elverson Jr., who commissioned it.

It was built over the tracks of the Philadelphia & Reading Railroad so that the huge rolls of newsprint feeding the presses could be delivered directly by train. The paper needed 800 tons of it per week; storage rooms held 200 railcars worth.

Elverson and his wife, Eleanore, a former actress, lived in apartments upstairs until he died of a heart attack in 1929 while planning festivities for the paper’s 100th anniversary. The tower’s four 16-foot clocks are accompanied by Westminster chimes; Elverson loved clocks and kept a collection of rare timepieces.

The Inquirer won 17 Pulitzers in its heyday from 1975 to 1990 before departing the premises in 2012. Plans to make the building into a casino were abandoned, and instead the granite and ivory terracotta highrise has been repurposed as police headquarters.

--

7 Girard Trust Building

Stephen Girard was one of the richest banking tycoons in American history, so the Philadelphian’s name held a natural appeal for financial institutions. The Girard Life Insurance, Annuity and Trust Company, formed five years after its namesake’s death, erected one of the city’s first highrises on the northeast corner of Broad and Chestnut.

In 1908, the truncated Girard Trust fittingly relocated to shorter headquarters — a two-story domed marble temple they built across the street. Eventually outgrowing that, they brought in the country’s preeminent architectural firm to design this tower, a marble-sheathed Neoclassical extension of their pantheon replica. A third skyscraper built next door in 1973, initially called Three Girard and later One Meridian Plaza, had to be demolished after it was gutted by a fire that also shut down the older highrise.

In 2000, the two marble Girard buildings reopened as a Ritz-Carlton, the city’s third. The first one still stands two blocks south on Broad Street; its owner built it out of spite when his wife was reprimanded for lighting a cigarette in the Bellevue-Stratford.

--

8 1500 Walnut Street

Diners savoring the filet mignon at Butcher & Singer may not be aware that the steakhouse takes its name from a brokerage house that for decades occupied the space inside the medieval-style carved limestone entryway. Today’s grandiose dining room, with its 24-foot-high painted beam ceilings and square columns of red marble, was originally made for a bank.

Founded by private financier Jay Cooke, the First National Bank of Philadelphia, as its name attests, was literally the first financial institution in the country chartered to print banknotes backed by the U.S. Treasury. Cooke was a private financier who loaned Pennsylvania $3 million to fund its Civil War efforts. He successfully lobbied President Abraham Lincoln and Congress to replace the country’s chaotic hodgepodge of state-run banks, establishing the banking system that exists to this day.

Livingston Jones, First National president when this office opened, and his wife, Edith, were outdoorsy types who enjoyed canoe trips in Canada. Their daughter Cornelia became a Chestnut Hill sensation, becoming a pilot at 17 and competing in air races and shows.

--

9 Lewis Tower

This concrete and steel office highrise with its stark bright cladding was added to an existing 16-story building on 15th Street that covers its lower floors with a far more staid Neoclassical facade. Its architect, Staten Island native Arthur Hall, designed army posts across the country during World War I, then came to Philadelphia, where he drew up the plans of at least two other skyscrapers and a number of Main Line homes.

Developer Richard Seltzer put a gymnasium with squash and handball courts halfway up the slender skyscraper so office tenants had a convenient place to exercise. In 1960 the Penthouse restaurant and cocktail lounge opened on the top floor, offering patrons spectacular city views with their nightcaps.

Lewis Tower was purchased in 2004 for conversion into condominiums, but things got complicated the following year, when a piece of stone veneer broke off and crashed through the roof of the restaurant next door, prompting city officials to close the building. Now fully repaired and renovated, it has been redubbed the Aria.

--

10 Equitable Building

The crenellated turrets on top of this building resemble Grey Towers Castle, a Glenside mansion that was the first major commission for architect Horace Trumbauer. Later jobs besides the Equitable Building included the Philadelphia Museum of Art and the Free Library of Philadelphia.

Within a year of its opening, this became the headquarters of the Philadelphia Rapid Transit Company and its powerful and visionary boss, Thomas Mitten. Mitten took the top floor for his management business and leased 12 floors for the transit company, putting bus waiting rooms and ticket offices on the ground floor along with his bank and securities company, which then acquired the property and renamed it the Mitten Building. Two years later, the city sued Mitten for alleged financial scams, and soon afterward his drowned body was discovered in a fishing pond on his Poconos estate.

A theater next door on Broad Street had its main lobby in the Equitable Building; its marquee still hangs over the Locust Street sidewalk, though the theater is now a parking garage and the lobby is a restaurant.

--

11 PSFS Building

With his city in the midst of a highrise boom, James Willcox, president of the Philadelphia Saving Fund Society, felt his institution’s planned new office tower had to make a statement to attract new tenants. Thus America got its first International Style skyscraper, a cubist masterpiece of polished granite, limestone, glass, and brick.

Inside and out, it emphasizes what architect George Howe called “the beautiful surfaces of machine production,” relying on simple geometric forms and lines for its appeal. Escalators brought customers to the banking hall on the second floor, a vast open space where ranks of boxy marble columns rise 30 feet to the ceiling and support the building above.

This was one of the first fully air conditioned office towers, and its trademark rooftop sign hides the cooling machinery. The TV tower is not original, added in 1948.

Furniture and fixtures were custom designed by the architects to complement their bold design, and main interior spaces have been meticulously preserved. The building is now a hotel, and guests seeking out the former boardroom on the 33rd floor can enjoy a sweeping panorama from Fairmount Park to the Delaware River.

--

12 Crozer Building

The finery of a Loire Valley château was draped over a steel frame to create this early Philadelphia highrise. It was erected for the American Baptist Publication Society, which for years had printed and sold religious tracts and Bibles at its offices here, maintained a library, and coordinated various charitable causes until an 1896 fire destroyed it all.

The new building’s French style obviously curtsies to Philadelphia City Hall, while its name honors the society’s former president, John Crozer, a wealthy textile manufacturer and dedicated philanthropist. The building opened in time for Christmas in 1897, and visitors marveled at its finely appointed bookstore with oak cabinetry, cushioned settees for browsing, and a dainty reading room for women. 

The lecture hall upstairs seated 600 guests, with high ceilings painted in allegorical frescoes. The exterior has suffered a bit since then, losing its original street-level façade and a sumptuous balcony railing that once stretched just below the steep mansard roof. But it still provides elegant quarters for the aspiring electricians who study at the charter trade school now located here.

--

13 Liberty Trust Building

A rich marble staircase worn by a century of shoe leather leads from the sidewalk entrance to what was originally a brightly sunlit banking floor. Now an appealing modern hotel lobby, it still preserves Liberty Title & Trust’s original marble tiled floors, elaborate crown molding and wall medallions, and a bronze elevator that accessed the old safety deposit boxes, which are now stacked on a giant bookcase for atmosphere.

Architect Frederic Hirons liked to blend old and new motifs too, both here and in his Beaux-Arts Institute of Design in Manhattan, which opened shortly after this building did. In digging the foundations, builders discovered a buried creek feeding the Schuylkill River. They spent months pumping out millions of gallons of water to stabilize the soggy soil; appropriately, years later, the highrise housed the city water department. 

This was the only building on the block spared when the convention center expanded to Broad Street. That was because the authority intended to put their headquarters here, but as costs ballooned, officials had to abandon their plan.

--

14 Beury Building

The founders of the National Bank of North Philadelphia, which opened in 1920, chose as their first president the attorney Charles Beury, a graduate of Princeton and Harvard Law. The financial institution’s rapid success led to construction of Uptown’s first skyscraper, called the National Bank of North Philadelphia Building.

Beury, meanwhile, had new presidential obligations. An influential trustee at nearby Temple University, he was picked for the executive job following the death of the institution’s founder. Refocused on the university, Beury remained the bank’s chairman until it was acquired by Bankers Trust Company in 1930. The successors renamed the building after him in September, then three months later became the first large Philadelphia bank to fail in the Great Depression.

Beury guided Temple’s steady growth in his 15 years as president, and a building on campus also bears his name. His once-stylish Art Deco tower on Broad Street long stood abandoned, crumbling, and infamously adorned by a pair of graffiti artists who proudly tagged it with their noms-de-can: “Forever” and “Boner.” After decades of neglect, it is being renovated into a hotel.

--

15 Edison Building

Ever since Ben Franklin flew his famous kite, electricity has played a key role in the City of Brotherly Love. On New Year’s Eve 1927, Thomas Edison himself sent a telegraph message to this new office tower named in his honor and owned by Philadelphia Electric Company.

On the elderly inventor’s signal, keyed from his home in Menlo Park, 483 floodlights flicked on to bathe the upper floors of the Edison in a rainbow of nighttime illumination. Behind the new skyscraper on Sansom Street was a six-story coal-fired electrical station Edison’s company had built in 1888, before mergers consolidated the city’s power businesses.

Architect John T. Windrim designed several power plants, including an immense Beaux-Arts station on the Delaware River in Chester, and went on to design the Lincoln-Liberty Building. His bold diamond patterns in the ground-level brickwork subtly repeat near the top. They are eclipsed, however, by the building’s latest light display, an illuminated sign for Thomas Jefferson University, which acquired the property in 1973.

The smokestack rises from a power plant next door that stands on the footprint of Edison’s original generating station.

--

16 Cathedral of Learning

When John Bowman became chancellor of the University of Pittsburgh in 1921, he proposed a bold plan for his growing institution: a college skyscraper. Philadelphia architect Charles Klauder, renowned for his campus buildings at Princeton and Cornell, designed the tower as a blend of Art Deco and his signature Collegiate Gothic style.

Ground was broken in 1926, and the first classes were held in the building in 1931, though the Great Depression delayed completion of the dramatic four-story Commons Room for six more years. The 40-story limestone highrise was the tallest educational building in the world until Moscow State University surpassed it in 1953.

At the time of construction, surveys showed that one of every three Pitt students was the child of an immigrant. To honor that heritage, the university invited Pittsburgh’s various ethnic organizations to design and fund 18 Nationality Rooms representing the mother countries. Students taking classes in the rooms, which now number 31, quickly learn to expect occasional interruptions by curious visitors peeking in the doorways.

--

17 Koppers Building

Heinrich Koppers of Germany developed an efficient industrial oven for producing coke, the essential fuel for iron and steel furnaces, while also capturing gas and tar byproducts for other uses. That interested U.S. Steel, so Koppers formed a Chicago company in 1907 to supply the American steel industry.

Financier Andrew Mellon soon acquired a controlling stake and moved the company to Pittsburgh. During World War I, he forced the German founder out entirely, and soon thereafter became Secretary of the Treasury.

Graham, Anderson, Probst & White designed the company’s Art Deco headquarters with a polished granite and limestone exterior and a chateau-style roof made of – what else – copper. It was briefly the city’s tallest skyscraper until overshadowed by the Gulf Building across the street, the headquarters of another company in the Mellon portfolio.

Koppers grew into a sprawling industrial conglomerate until a 1988 British hostile takeover led to the sale of several divisions. Managers bought the chemicals business, which is still based in the skyscraper. The building’s three-story marble lobby with bronze accents has been extensively restored.

--

18 Keenan Building

After Thomas Keenan made a fortune selling his newspaper, the Pittsburgh Press, he commissioned the first skyscraper on Liberty Avenue. Its signature flourish, a cast concrete baroque dome, was inspired by an even more elaborate dome capping the headquarters of the San Francisco Call.

The Keenan dome was originally gold, not red, and was crowned by a large globe and eagle. First to move in under the golden dome was a photography studio, then for decades the uppermost stories housed a school for women.

Keenan crusaded against civic corruption and vice; that, along with his bachelor status, may explain false rumors that he lived in a penthouse under the dome and used it for trysts. Today the space is a community room for residents of what is now called Midtown Towers. It has been extensively remodeled after a 2017 fire.

Ten bas-reliefs at sidewalk level honor important public figures including city namesake William Pitt, philanthropist Mary Schenley, and H.D.W. English, president of the chamber of commerce, which moved its offices here when the building opened.

--

19 Emerson Tower

Like a bizarre lighthouse shining over the harbor, this showy brick replica of the Palazzo Vecchio in Florence, Italy, was once crowned with a revolving, illuminated 50-foot tall bottle of the Emerson Drug Company’s signature hangover cure.

That massive beacon caused cracks in the tower and had to come down in 1936. But the dozen letters spelling Bromo-Seltzer that replace traditional numerals on the clocks indicate how far Isaac Emerson was willing to go to flog his product.

The former drugstore proprietor invented a fizzy elixir to treat headaches and indigestion, and encouraged its widespread adoption by other druggists through offers of company stock in exchange for high sales volume. The powder was packaged in attractive blue glass bottles, samples of which are displayed in a quaint museum on the top floor.

Emerson’s factory is gone, but the tower it was attached to was given to the city when the drug company left town. Too skinny for offices — two-thirds of each floor is used up by the elevator, stairs, and landing — it has been converted into loft space for artists.

--

20 Baltimore Trust Building

The exuberant exterior of Baltimore’s only Art Deco skyscraper features cresting ocean waves and crabs to go with its gargoyles. Its interior is equally breathtaking, with multicolored marble columns supporting the painted beamed ceiling and four large murals depicting the city in each century of its existence.

Alas, the lovely hand-wrought iron gates by master blacksmith Samuel Yellin now bar the public from the former banking hall, which has been repurposed as a gym. Its spectacular mosaic floor by the acclaimed muralist Hildreth Meière — creator of Radio City Music Hall’s signature sculptures — is covered with mats to protect it.

Once the state’s biggest financial institution, Baltimore Trust did not survive the 1933 banking panic. Now a residential highrise, the building has changed hands and names repeatedly. Its most colorful owner, West Virginia millionaire and political gadfly Raymond J. Funkhouser, renamed it the O’Sullivan building in 1942 after a company he owned that made rubber shoe heels. He also kicked an upscale barbershop out of the top floor so he could put his penthouse there.